[ENG-9487][docs] add docs for custom builds (#23880)
expo/expo: docs/pages/eas-build-custom-builds/custom-build-functions.mdx

---
title: Custom JavaScript/TypeScript functions
description: Learn how to create and use custom JavaScript/TypeScript functions in your EAS Build custom builds configuration.
---

import { Terminal } from '~/ui/components/Snippet';
import { Step } from '~/ui/components/Step';
import ImageSpotlight from '~/components/plugins/ImageSpotlight';
import { BoxLink } from '~/ui/components/BoxLink';
import { GithubIcon } from '@expo/styleguide-icons';

Custom functions are a great way to extend the functionality of EAS Build custom builds. You can use them to write reusable pieces of custom build config in a very powerful and convenient way.

<Step label="1">

> ## Creating custom JavaScript/TypeScript functions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Create custom JavaScript/TypeScript functions
```

Let's use short form verbs instead of gerunds for section titles for consistency reasons.

> The easiest way to create a custom function is to use the `create-eas-build-function` CLI tool.
> 
> By running the following command, from the same as your `eas.json` file, you will be able to create a new custom TypeScript function:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The easiest way to create a custom function is to use the `create-eas-build-function` CLI tool. By running the following command from the same directory as your **eas.json** file, you can create a new custom TypeScript function:
```

- [File name bold](https://github.com/expo/expo/blob/main/guides/Expo%20Documentation%20Writing%20Style%20Guide.md#filenames-as-bold-text)
- Felt like there was some context missing and confusing when: "...By running the following command, from the same as your `eas.json` file...". Did not understand what the "same" is referencing too.

<Terminal cmd={['$ npx create-eas-build-function@latest ./.eas/build/myFunction']} />

> This will create a new module called `myFunction` in your `.eas/build` directory. The module will contain a pre-generated module configuration and the `src` directory with the `index.ts` file containing the default TypeScript function template.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This creates a new module called `myFunction` in the **.eas/build** directory. The module will contain a pre-generated module configuration and the **src** directory with the **index.ts** file containing the default TypeScript function template.
```

```ts .eas/build/myFunction/src/index.ts
// This file was autogenerated by `create-eas-build-function` command.
// Go to README.md to learn more about how to write your own custom build functions.

import { BuildStepContext } from '@expo/steps';

// interface FunctionInputs {
//   // specify the type of the inputs value and whether they are required here
//   // example: name: BuildStepInput<BuildStepInputValueTypeName.STRING, true>;
// }

// interface FunctionOutputs {
//   // specify the function outputs and whether they are required here
//   // example: name: BuildStepOutput<true>;
// }

async function myFunction(
  ctx: BuildStepContext
  // {
  //   inputs,
  //   outputs,
  //   env,
  // }: {
  //   inputs: FunctionInputs;
  //   outputs: FunctionOutputs;
  //   env: BuildStepEnv;
  // }
): Promise<void> {
  ctx.logger.info('Hello from my TypeScript function!');
}

export default myFunction;
```

</Step>

<Step label="2">

> ## Building your custom function and connecting it to your config file

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Build a custom function and connect it to the config file
```

> After generating the custom build function next thing you need to do is to build it and connect it to your eas build custom builds config YAML file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After generating the custom build function, the next thing you need to do is to build it and connect it to your EAS Build custom builds config YAML file.
```

- Branding typo

> ### Building your custom function

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Build a custom function
```

> To build your custom function you need to run the following command in `.eas/build/myFunction` directory:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To build the custom function you need to run the following command in **.eas/build/myFunction** directory:
```

<Terminal cmd={['$ npm run build']} />

> This command will trigger the `build` script placed in the `package.json` file of your custom function module.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This command triggers the `build` script to be placed in the **package.json** file of your custom function module.
```

```json package.json
{
  ...
  "scripts": {
    ...

>     "build": "ncc build ./src/index.ts -o build/ --minify --no-cache --no-source-map-register" /* @end */

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    "build": "ncc build ./src/index.ts -o build/ --minify --no-cache --no-source-map-register"
```

    ...
  },
  ...
}
```

> **Info** The `build` script uses the [ncc](https://github.com/vercel/ncc) to compile your custom function module into a single file with all its dependencies. If you don't have the `ncc` installed globally on your machine, run `npm install -g @vercel/ncc` to install it.

> The `build` script will generate the `build/index.js` file which will be used by the EAS Build to run your custom function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `build` script generates the **build/index.js** file that is used by the EAS Build to run your custom function.
```

> > **Warning** The `build/index.js` file must be uploaded to EAS Build as a part of your project archive so the EAS Build builder can run your custom function. Make sure it's not excluded by your `.gitignore` file or `.easignore` file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **Warning** The **build/index.js** file must be uploaded to EAS Build as a part of your project archive so the EAS Build builder can run your custom function. Make sure it's not excluded by **.gitignore** file or **.easignore** file.
```

> ### Connecting the custom function to your config file

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Connect the custom function to the config file
```

> Let's assume that except from `myFunction` you also have a `config.yml` file in your `.eas/build` directory. The file contains the following content:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's assume that except from `myFunction`, you have a **config.yml** file in the **.eas/build** directory. It contains the following content:
```

```yaml .eas/build/config.yml
build:
  name: My example config
  steps:
    - eas/checkout
    - run:
        name: Install dependencies
        command: npm install
    - run:
        name: Finished
        command: echo Finished
```

> To add your custom function to the config you need to add the following lines to the `config.yml` file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To add your custom function to the config, you need to add the following lines to the **config.yml** file:
```

```yaml .eas/build/config.yml
build:
  name: My example config
  steps:
    - eas/checkout
    - run:
        name: Install dependencies
        command: npm install
    - run:
        name: Finished
        command: echo Finished

# @info #
functions:
  my_function:
    name: My function
    path: ./myFunction
# @end #
```

The `path` property should be a relative path from the config file to your custom function module. In this case, it's just `./myFunction`.

> Now we can add a call to the `my_function` function in the `config.yml` file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, add a call to the `my_function` function in the **config.yml** file:
```

```yaml .eas/build/config.yml
build:
  name: My example config
  steps:
    - eas/checkout
    - run:
        name: Install dependencies
        command: npm install
    # @info #
    - my_function
    # @end #
    - run:
        name: Finished
        command: echo Finished

functions:
  my_function:
    name: My function
    path: ./myFunction
```

<ImageSpotlight
  alt="Example of a custom build config using custom JavaScript/TypeScript function."
  src="/static/images/eas-build/custom-build-function.png"
/>

</Step>

<Step label="3">

> ## Modyfing and developing your custom function

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Modify and develop the custom function
```

> Let's consider a little bit more advanced example. Let's say that we want to make our custom function sum two numbers and print the result to the console, and save it as an output of the function.
> 
> To do so we can modify the `config.yml` and `index.ts` files to make the function accept two inputs called `num1` and `num2` and return the sum of them as an output called `sum`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Consider an advanced example. Let's say you want to make a custom function sum two numbers and print the result to the console, and save it as an output of the function. To do so, you can modify the **config.yml** and **index.ts** files to make the function accept two inputs called `num1` and `num2` and return the sum of them as an output called `sum`.
```

I don't think there is value to break the above text into two paragraphs.

  num1: BuildStepInput<BuildStepInputValueTypeName.NUMBER, true>;
  num2: BuildStepInput<BuildStepInputValueTypeName.NUMBER, true>;
}
/* @end */

/* @info */
interface FunctionOutputs {
  // template argument is a boolean indicating if the output is required
  sum: BuildStepOutput<true>;
}
/* @end */

async function myFunction(
  ctx: BuildStepContext,
  {
    inputs,
    outputs,
  }: // env,
  {
    inputs: FunctionInputs;
    outputs: FunctionOutputs;
    // env: BuildStepEnv;
  }
): Promise<void> {
  /* @info */
  ctx.logger.info(`num1: ${inputs.num1.value}`);
  ctx.logger.info(`num2: ${inputs.num2.value}`);

  const sum = inputs.num1.value + inputs.num2.value;

  ctx.logger.info(`sum: ${sum}`);

  outputs.sum.set(sum.toString()); // for now outputs can only of string type, but that will change in the future
  /* @end */
}

export default myFunction;
```

<ImageSpotlight
  alt="Example of a custom build config using custom JavaScript/TypeScript function."
  src="/static/images/eas-build/custom-build-function-advanced.png"
/>

> **Info** Remember to rebuild your custom function after making any changes to it.

</Step>

## Summary

> - Custom JavaScript/TypeScript functions are a great way to extend the EAS Build custom builds functionality with your custom logic, in a pleasant way, by writing JavaScript/TypeScript code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Writing custom JavaScript/TypeScript functions is a great way to extend the functionality of EAS Build custom builds with your own logic.
```

We can be a bit concise here.

- Custom JavaScript/TypeScript functions are reusable and can be used in multiple workflows.
- Using custom JavaScript/TypeScript functions is a great option for more advanced use cases that are not easy to do by writing shell scripts.

> - Most of our [built-in functions](/eas-build-custom-builds/custom-build-config-schema/#built-in-eas-functions) are open-sourced and can be used as a reference for writing your own custom functions.

Reviewer: Need to change the URL here if we/when we change the filenames and address the first suggestion.

> Also, check out the **example repository** for more detailed examples:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Check out the **example repository** for more detailed examples:
```
